With roughly 1230 kilometers from the melting snow
masses of the alps to the Southern Bight in the
North Sea, the Rhine River is the economic spine
of western Europe and connects the landlocked
alpine republics through Germany, France and
the Netherlands to the rest of the world.
Along this path, the river undergoes
6 distinct geographic phases,
starting with the Alpine Rhine in southern
Switzerland, which forms from many smaller
mountain creeks whose milky waters eventually
combine into the Anterior and Posterior Rhine.
After about 100 kilometers the river becomes an important border
marker, separating Switzerland from Liechtenstein
and Austria, before collecting in Lake Constance.
Despite the 200 kilometer long journey
that these waters have already traveled,
for navigational purposes, it is here where the
river officially starts. The Old Rhine Bridge
in the city of Constance marks the 0 km datum
for the Rhinekilometer scale and as the Rhine
winds its way through the hard limestone
rock of the Swiss-German border frontier,
its persistence in an ever changing topography
shows in the form of the Rhine Falls, the most
powerful waterfall of Europe. In just
15.000 years since the last ice age,
the river eroded away the rock which blocked its
path, creating this fascinating natural spectacle.
Towards the end of its journey through
Switzerland, the Rhine turns sharply
at Basel's "Rhine knee," passing the
Switzerland-France-Germany tripoint
border. The narrow and rapid river here has
long hindered access to landlocked Switzerland,
so France built the 50km Grand Canal d'Alsace,
which is a parallel waterway that tames the Rhine,
and enables navigation to Switzerland and hydropower
extraction for France's industrial heartland.
Roughly half-way along its course and entirely
within Germany now, the largest tributary,
the River Main confluences on the eastern bank,
which also acts as a gateway for inter-european
ship traffic, connecting to the Danube and the
Black Sea through a series of locks and canals.
Past this point, the Middle Rhine impresses
with over 50 pompous medieval castles and
terraced vineyards covering the hills and rocky
out-crops of its banks, turning the Rhine into a
fairytale land. The up to 200 meter deep
Rhine gorge walls in this section slowly
give way to more mellow banks again,
with the urban centers of Germany's
most populous and most productive
region replacing the tranquility.
Over 10.5 million people call this short stretch
their home, and with most of the major tributaries
having now combined their water masses, the Rhine
has turned into a slow flowing giant that meanders
through the flat German and Dutch countryside.
200 km before the delta, the river only lies 15m
above the water level of the North Sea, and the
mellow gradient leads to the main stem fanning
out and covering nearly the entire southern part
of the Netherlands. These broad, interconnected
waterways create ideal conditions for the shipping
industry, which has established itself across the
delta streams, with Europe's busiest
port, lying right at the gateway to the North Sea.
If you want to learn more about the world’s
greatest river, you can check out this playlist,
where I have already covered many
of the world’s longest rivers,
or watch what YouTube thinks is best for
you here. See you in the next one, cheers.